this video is sponsored by
curiositystream which now comes with
nebula for
free when you sign up using the link in
the description
tearing through the crowded streets of
philadelphia an electric car
and a gas-powered car sought to win a
heated race
one that mimicked how cars are actually
used
the cars had to stop at stop lights wait
for pedestrians to cross the street and
swerve in and out of the hundreds of
horse-drawn buggies
that's right horse-drawn buggies because
this race took place in 1908
it wanted to settle once and for all
which car was the superior urban
vehicle although the gas power car was
more powerful
the electric car was more versatile and
as the cars passed over the finish line
the defeat
was stunning the 1908 studebaker
electric car
won by 10 minutes so if in 1908 the
was clearly the better form of
transportation why don't we drive them
now today i'm going to answer that
question by diving into the history of
electric cars
and what i discovered may surprise you
in 1881 at a blistering pace of nine
miles per hour
inventor gustav truvay introduced the
streets of paris
and ultimately the world to the quiet
hum of the electric
carriage for the wealthy socialites of
paris and their counterparts in new york
the horseless carriage was
a must-have and electric motors were the
superior choice
by 1900 there were 4 1992 vehicles on
the streets of the us
steam cars accounted for 1681 of these
vehicles
1575 were electric
and 936 had internal combustion engines
if you just wanted to get around town
the electric carriage was the better
option that is
if you were rich enough to afford one
unlike internal combustion engines
electric vehicles were easy to turn on
accelerate
brake there was no exhaust and you
didn't have something constantly
exploding
under your seat oh and you also didn't
have to crank the engine
every time you stopped which is part of
the reason why the electric studebaker
won that philadelphia race so handily as
a result of this ease of use
electric cars were looking like big
business in the early 1900s
especially for the industry giant
electric vehicle company
at the time the electric vehicle company
was the biggest car manufacturer
in the country and they used a model
that seems revolutionary now
but makes sense back then instead of
selling their cars they rented them out
to people for the day
or for multiple days each night the
renter could return the car to a central
garage
and the electric vehicle company would
charge and service the vehicle
a model very similar to how stables
worked at the time
but despite the electric car's success
its golden age
was about to end
first an investigation by the new york
herald accused the electric vehicle
company of fraudulently
securing alone leading to intense
backlash that ultimately bankrupted the
company in 1901
then henry ford started banging out
gas-powered vehicles and with the help
of scale
exploitation of his workers and the
invention of the electric starter in
1912 which meant that drivers no longer
had to crank their cars
every time they wanted to travel people
started paying attention to the internal
combustion engine
around that same time roads were
beginning to be paved but these roads
took people out into the country which
lacked charging ports
so the range of electric vehicles became
more of an issue
local and federal governments failed to
build the needed infrastructure for
electric vehicles which meant that
gas-powered vehicles
were a much better option for the
growing hordes hoping to escape
the city and finally as the auto
industry began to attract more customers
in the early 1900s
advertising became increasingly gendered
electric vehicles more often than not
were sold to women as easy to drive
parlors on wheels even henry ford's wife
owned an electric vehicle gas-powered
cars
on the other hand were painted as dirty
greasy
powerful and masculine cars that could
take you out to the country
and then let you speed through the
streets so white men aka those that had
both money and power in early 20th
century america
aka the primary buyers of cars tended to
purchase
gas-powered vehicles and so by the 1920s
the perfectly
serviceable electric car was all but
extinct
these cars failed not because they were
inferior vehicles they failed because
cultural and societal pressures
steered us into the driver's seat of gas
guzzlers
the electric car is
here the ev-1 a revolution in the car
industry with california's announcement
of a zero emissions car mandate
general motors scrambled to make an
electric car their answer was the 1996
ev1
a futuristic car for the 90s that could
reach 80 miles per hour on the highway
and had a range of 70 to
100 miles all on an electric battery
the electric car was back tom hanks
grabbed one
and loved it that sucker goes that they
will take you down the pch so fast you
could get a ticket and so did danny
devito plug it in at night that's all
you did
nothing no repairs no nothing but gm
wasn't just making this car
because they cared about the environment
or electric cars for that matter they
made the ev1
because they had to the california air
resources board required the top seven
auto manufacturers to make two percent
of its fleet emissions free by
1998 5 by 2001
and 10 of its fleet emissions free by
2003. so car manufacturers
like gm initially complied they
retrofitted their models with electric
motors
and sold them throughout california in
the beginning it seemed like the auto
industry was going to make a momentous
change that is until people started
looking under the hood
while gm was leasing their ev1s to the
likes of tom hanks they were also
mounting lobbying
advertising and astroturfing campaigns
to dismantle the zero emissions mandate
why you may ask well consumer advocate
ralph nader
seems to think it's pretty simple the
executives at the top
their motto seem to have been going
backwards into the future
despite consumer demand and large
waitlists for the ev1
gm actively sought to dismantle ev
production
because it was inconvenient for them
keep in mind this was around the same
time when they started selling
suvs and hummers on mass so they not
only successfully got the california air
resources board to repeal the mandate
but afterwards
gm rounded up every single ev1 they had
leased out
took them to a junkyard and crushed them
that's right the company that just ran
this super bowl ad did you know that
norway sells way more electric cars per
capita than the us
norway had a successful electric vehicle
program in the early 2000s
and they purposefully tanked it because
they wanted to sell more suvs
hummers and gas vehicles
are things different now in 2021 or will
we just repeat the same mistakes
of history if tesla's and other electric
vehicles trajectory or any indicator
evs might be here to stay if and how
quickly they replace gas-powered cars
seems to be up to strong government
policy policy which
up until november 23 2020 gm was
ruthlessly opposing their flip-flopping
might just have something to do with the
fact that trump
is no longer in the white house in fact
throughout trump's presidency
the auto industry fought tooth and nail
to prevent any sort of emissions
standards
in march of 2020 trump with the support
of auto industry giants rolled back a
landmark obama-era emissions mandate the
rollback would have led to
nearly a billion additional metric tons
of co2 in the atmosphere
if not for biden's reinstatement of the
order much like california's zero
emissions mandate in the early 2000s
gm was right there on the ground
lobbying for that rollback to happen
the national auto dealers association
which gm works closely with
has spent over 57 million dollars
lobbying congress since 1998.
the reality is that emissions mandates
and electric car subsidies
do work but while great for us for the
auto industry it forces them to do away
with their going backward into the
future mindset
but it is possible to rapidly ramp up
electric vehicle use
norway is a perfect example in 2012
three percent of the country's new cars
were electric
just seven years later that number is up
to 56 percent
what norway did is quite simple they
subsidized evs heavily to the point
where they were cheaper than their
gas-powered counterparts
and they built a lot of charging
infrastructure to support these new cars
it does seem like us is starting to
follow suit with california's governor
issuing an executive order banning
gas-powered car sales by 2035
and gm saying that by that same year it
will only sell
electric cars while this is hopeful news
considering the history of the auto
industry which by the way raleigh from
the youtube channel climatetown did a
video all about the auto industry over
at his channel it's hard to fully
embrace these announcements without
some skepticism
as we move closer and closer to 2050 the
year when the world
must be at zero missions to avoid the
worst climate change scenarios
i think it's important to take a step
back and consider whether switching to
electric cars
is the best solution no i don't mean we
should stick with the
internal combustion engine what i'm
saying is we should be trying to replace
our current cars with electric models
while also envisioning a world with less
cars
because to be honest cars suck the
co-founder of zipcar robin chase
describes the failed promise of cars
perfectly in a documentary on curiosity
stream we were promised you know that
cars brought independence
but we all know that most of us are
driving is in very dense traffic
it's not a pleasure it's very expensive
and time-consuming even
electric cars have an impact both in
terms of emissions
and the green colonialism and
exploitation that accompanies corporate
desires
for metals like lithium so when we begin
to support new infrastructure for
charging systems we also need to
consider how to build cities and towns
that no longer center cars
as a resident's primary mode of
transportation and make walking
biking and using public transit really
easy really pleasurable
and really cheap or free the key
question here
should be how can we connect countries
states
cities and towns through affordable and
clean public transportation
without cars yes the electric car will
have some role to play in this new
transportation system
but it should be seen as a piece of the
puzzle rather than the essential tool
that unlocks travel
creating this alternative transportation
system will
certainly be difficult but not only is
it possible through militant community
organizing
and consistent public pressure on
corporations politicians and governments
it is also an essential part of a more
ethical
and just zero-emissions world
after being on youtube for over four
years i still find it really hard to
create climate-oriented videos that
perform
well the truth is that the algorithm
tends not to like politically charged
videos like the one
i just made about eco-socialism and
bolivia and videos like those end up
doing poorly or even getting demonetized
which is why a bunch of creator friends
and i teamed up to create a platform
where we can make content without having
to worry about pleasing the youtube
algorithm
it's called nebula and we're thrilled to
be partnering with curiositystream
nebula is an ad-free video streaming
platform
that allows creators to create without
worrying about
views or sponsorships with exclusive
content
from a wide range of educational
youtubers like polymatter
simon clark and t1j nebula is the
perfect place to consume
ad-free educational content there's even
a nebula exclusive video from wendover
productions all about how
tesla superchargers work but what does
this have to do with curiosity stream
well as the go-to streaming platform for
thousands of top tier documentaries like
the transportation of tomorrow
documentary i use to make
this video curiosity stream loves
supporting educational
creators so we worked out a deal where
if you sign up with the link below
not only do you get access to curiosity
stream but you'll also get nebula
for free and this is not a trial you'll
have nebula as long as you're a
curiosity stream member and for a
limited time curiosity stream is
offering
26 off their annual plan that's less
than
14.79 a year for both curiosity stream
and nebula by signing up you will not
only directly support our changing
climate but you'll also gain access to
thousands of documentaries
and exclusive videos from your favorite
creators
so if you want to support both our
changing climate and hundreds of other
educational content creators
go to curiositystream.com occ
or click the link in the description and
sign up for curiosity stream and nebula
for just
14.79 per year that's
26 off hey everyone charlie here thanks
so much for watching all the way to the
end
if you've already signed up for
curiositystream you can also support me
by becoming an r-changing climate
patreon supporter
just pledging one dollar a month gives
me the financial stability i need to
keep making more videos like this
thanks again for watching and i will see
you in two weeks